src/m4/skills/system/clinical-research-session/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: clinical-research-session
description: Start a structured clinical research session. Use when users describe research goals, want to analyze cohorts, investigate hypotheses, or need a rigorous research plan. Interviews the user, then produces a research protocol.
tier: validated
category: system
---

# M4 Clinical Research Workflow

Structured clinical research from hypothesis through analysis. All work is tracked in a **vitrine study** — see CLAUDE.md for the vitrine quick reference or `/vitrine-api` for the full API.

## When This Skill Activates

- User invokes `/research` command
- User describes research intent: "I want to study...", "Can we analyze...", "What's the mortality rate for..."
- User mentions cohort analysis, hypothesis testing, or comparative studies

## Terminal and Vitrine

The researcher has the terminal and vitrine open side by side. Vitrine is where structured interaction happens — forms, data review, approvals. The terminal is where you discuss, explain reasoning, and refine.

**When blocking for input (`wait=True`), always narrate the handoff in the terminal** before the `show()` call. Tell the researcher what you've posted and what you need: "I've posted the study parameters form in vitrine — please fill in your outcome and exclusion criteria."

## Study Setup

Every research session is organized as a **study** — one study per research question, spanning one or more conversations.

```python
from m4.vitrine import (
    show, section, register_output_dir, study_context,
    list_studies, export, set_status, Form, Question,
)

STUDY = "early-vasopressors-sepsis-v1"
output_dir = register_output_dir(study=STUDY)

# FIRST artifact: write STUDY.md describing the research question and approach
(output_dir / "STUDY.md").write_text("""# Early Vasopressor Use in Sepsis
...research question, design, key definitions...
""")
```

**Continuing a study:** Call `list_studies()` and `study_context(study)` to re-orient. Use `section()` to mark a new conversation within an ongoing study — not a new study.

**Branching:** Create a new version (`v2`) when the researcher wants a different approach.

**File artifacts are mandatory.** Every DataFrame, figure, and analysis script MUST be saved to `output_dir`. Never save to `/tmp/` or rely on vitrine cards alone — cards document the narrative, files ARE the science. If the session ends, files must be the complete reproducible record.

**Required output files:**
- `STUDY.md` — written first, describes what this study is about (research question, design, key definitions)
- Numbered scripts: `01_cohort_definition.py`, `02_analysis.py`, etc. — the code that produced results
- Data: `.parquet` files for every significant DataFrame
- Figures: `.png` / `.html` for every chart shown in vitrine

---

## Phase 1: Research Interview

Collect study parameters through vitrine forms. The interview is **adaptive** — compose questions based on what you already know from the user's initial description.

**Guidelines:**
- **Skip questions** the user already answered in their prompt
- **Add questions** not in the library if the research question demands it (time windows, subgroup definitions, method preferences)
- **Split into multiple forms** when it makes sense — quick basics first, targeted follow-up after processing answers
- Narrate each blocking call in the terminal before posting

### Question Library

Use `from m4.vitrine import Form, Question` and compose from these. **Use `multiple=True` for any question where multiple answers make sense** (e.g., exclusion criteria, confounders). Without it, options render as single-select radio buttons.

**Research question:**
```python
Question("question", question="Research Question",
         options=[
             ("Association study", "Is variable X associated with outcome Y?"),
             ("Prediction model", "Can we predict outcome Y from variables X?"),
             ("Cohort characterization", "What are the characteristics of population P?"),
         ], allow_other=True)
```

**Study design:**
```python
Question("design", question="Study Design",
         options=[
             ("Descriptive", "Characterize a cohort — demographics, severity, outcomes"),
             ("Comparative", "Compare groups — treatment vs control, exposed vs unexposed"),
             ("Predictive", "Build or validate a prediction model"),
             ("Exploratory", "Hypothesis-generating — clustering, pattern discovery"),
         ])
```

**Primary outcome:**
```python
Question("outcome", question="Primary Outcome",
         options=[
             ("In-hospital mortality", "hospital_expire_flag in admissions"),
             ("28-day mortality", "dod relative to admission or ICU entry"),
             ("90-day mortality", "dod relative to admission or ICU entry"),
             ("ICU length of stay", "los in icustays — beware survivor bias"),
             ("Hospital length of stay", "dischtime minus admittime — beware survivor bias"),
             ("Ventilator-free days", "28 minus days on mechanical ventilation"),
             ("Vasopressor-free days", "28 minus days on vasopressors"),
             ("AKI incidence", "KDIGO stage 2+ after exposure window"),
         ])
```

**Exposure / intervention:**
```python
Question("exposure", question="Exposure / Intervention",
         options=[
             ("Treatment timing", "Early vs late initiation of a therapy"),
             ("Treatment dose / intensity", "High vs low dose, or trajectory over time"),
             ("Treatment received vs not", "Binary: any use within a defined window"),
             ("Severity score / biomarker", "Continuous or categorical exposure variable"),
             ("None (descriptive study)", "No exposure — cohort characterization only"),
         ])
```

**Population:**
```python
Question("population", question="Base Population",
         options=[
             ("Sepsis (Sepsis-3)", "SOFA >= 2 + suspected infection"),
             ("Septic shock", "Sepsis-3 + vasopressor + lactate > 2 mmol/L"),
             ("ARDS / respiratory failure", "Berlin criteria or P/F ratio-based"),
             ("Cardiac arrest", "In- or out-of-hospital cardiac arrest"),
             ("Heart failure / cardiogenic shock", "Acute decompensated HF"),
             ("Acute kidney injury", "KDIGO criteria"),
             ("General ICU", "All ICU admissions, no disease-specific filter"),
         ])
```

**Exclusion criteria:**
```python
Question("exclusions", question="Exclusion Criteria", multiple=True,
         options=[
             ("First ICU stay only", "Exclude readmissions — one observation per patient"),
             ("Age < 18", "Exclude pediatric patients"),
             ("ICU stay < 24h", "Minimum observation window — watch for immortal time bias"),
             ("Early death", "Exclude death within N hours — specify N"),
             ("DNR / comfort care on admission", "Exclude treatment limitations"),
             ("Chronic dialysis / ESRD", "Exclude pre-existing end-stage renal disease"),
             ("Missing key variables", "Exclude if critical data points are absent"),
         ])
```

**Confounders:**
```python
Question("confounders", question="Key Confounders", multiple=True,
         options=[
             ("Age, sex", "Basic demographics"),
             ("Illness severity (SOFA)", "Organ dysfunction at baseline"),
             ("Illness severity (APACHE III / SAPS-II)", "Composite severity scores"),
             ("Charlson / Elixhauser comorbidities", "Pre-existing chronic conditions"),
             ("Admission type", "Medical vs surgical vs trauma"),
             ("Baseline labs", "Lactate, creatinine, bilirubin, platelets, etc."),
             ("Mechanical ventilation status", "On/off MV at baseline"),
             ("Vasopressor use at baseline", "Already on vasopressors at time zero"),
         ])
```

**Dataset:**
```python
Question("dataset", question="Primary Dataset",
         options=[
             ("mimic-iv", "Full MIMIC-IV"),
             ("mimic-iv-demo", "100 patients, good for testing"),
             ("eicu", "Multi-center ICU database"),
         ], allow_other=False)
```

### After the Interview

Review answers in the terminal. Pay attention to "Other" entries — help make them precise.

Key refinements to consider:
- **Research question** — Make specific and answerable: "Are sicker patients dying more?" → "Is day-1 SOFA independently associated with 30-day mortality in sepsis?"
- **Outcome** — Confirm operationalization (which table/column, survivor bias for LOS, follow-up window for X-free days)
- **Exposure** — Nail down time window, comparator, and immortal time bias risk
- **Population & Exclusions** — Check that exclusions don't introduce bias for this specific design
- **Confounders** — Check for mediators on the causal path (should NOT be adjusted for); consider propensity scores for treatment comparisons

---

## Phase 2: Research Protocol

Draft a structured protocol. Save to `output_dir / "PROTOCOL.md"` and show with `wait=True` for approval.

```markdown
## Research Protocol: [Title]

### Research Question
[Specific, answerable question]

### Study Design
[Descriptive/Comparative/Predictive/Exploratory]

### Population
**Inclusion:** [criteria]
**Exclusion:** [criteria with rationale]

### Variables
**Primary Outcome:** [definition and measurement]
**Exposure:** [definition and timing]
**Covariates:** [list with definitions]

### Analysis Plan
1. [Step with rationale]
2. ...

### Potential Biases & Limitations
- [Known limitation]

### M4 Skills to Use
- [Skill]: [Why]
```

---

## Phase 3: Scientific Integrity Guardrails

Apply throughout the analysis.

### Bias Prevention

**Immortal Time Bias**
- Define exposure at a FIXED time point (admission, 24h, 48h)
- Never use "ever received during stay" for treatments
- Use landmark analysis when appropriate

**Selection Bias**
- Report all exclusions with counts (CONSORT diagram)
- Analyze whether excluded patients differ
- Avoid conditioning on post-treatment variables

**Information Leakage**
- ICD codes are assigned at DISCHARGE — don't use for admission predictions
- Length of stay is only known at discharge
- Labs/vitals must be timestamped appropriately

**Confounding by Indication**
- Treatments are given to sicker patients
- Always adjust for severity (SOFA, APACHE, SAPS)
- Consider propensity scores for treatment comparisons

### Statistical Rigor

- Pre-specify primary outcome; apply Bonferroni/FDR for secondary analyses
- Report cohort sizes at each step; be cautious with small subgroups
- Report missingness; consider imputation vs complete case; perform sensitivity analyses

### Visualizations

Use plots liberally — a chart often reveals what a table hides.

**Distributions → plots, not key-value cards.** Categorical variables (race, gender, admission type) → horizontal bar chart. Continuous variables (age, LOS, SOFA) → histogram. Never `show(dict)` for a distribution with 5+ categories — use `show(fig)` instead. Reserve key-value cards for small summary stats (n, median, IQR).

Other plots: Kaplan-Meier curves for survival, forest plots for effect sizes, covariate balance after matching, CONSORT flow diagrams. If you're staring at numbers and deciding what they mean, make a plot instead.

### Reproducibility

- **Save every analysis script** as a numbered file in `output_dir`: `01_cohort_definition.py`, `02_baseline_characteristics.py`, etc. The script should be the complete, runnable Python code for that step — not a fragment. This is non-negotiable; without scripts the research is not reproducible.
- Use `show()` for decisions and findings; `section()` for phase transitions
- Use `set_status()` during long operations
- Export the complete study at the end

---

## Phase 4: M4 Skills Reference

### Severity Scores
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `sofa-score` | Organ dysfunction, Sepsis-3 criteria |
| `apsiii-score` | Comprehensive severity with mortality prediction |
| `sapsii-score` | Alternative to APACHE, international benchmarking |
| `oasis-score` | When labs unavailable (vitals only) |
| `sirs-criteria` | Historical sepsis definition, comparison studies |

### Cohort Definitions
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `sepsis-3-cohort` | Sepsis studies (SOFA >= 2 + suspected infection) |
| `first-icu-stay` | Avoid correlated observations |
| `suspicion-of-infection` | Infection timing (antibiotics + cultures) |

### Clinical Concepts
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `kdigo-aki-staging` | AKI as outcome or covariate |
| `vasopressor-equivalents` | Standardize vasopressor doses |
| `baseline-creatinine` | AKI baseline reference |
| `gcs-calculation` | Neurological status |

### Data & Methodology
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `m4-api` | Multi-step analysis, statistical tests |
| `clinical-research-pitfalls` | Review for common errors |
| `mimic-table-relationships` | Understanding joins |
| `mimic-eicu-mapping` | Cross-dataset queries |

---

## Example Flow

**User:** "I want to study if early vasopressor use affects mortality in sepsis"

**What you already know:** comparative design, sepsis population, vasopressor exposure, mortality-related. Skip those questions.

**Form:** Ask only what's missing — outcome definition, "early" window, exclusion criteria, dataset. Narrate in terminal: "I've posted a form in vitrine for the details I couldn't infer — outcome, time window, exclusions, and dataset."

**After response, refine in terminal:**
- Anchor the time window to suspected infection onset (suspicion-of-infection skill), not ICU admission
- Recommend excluding death within the exposure window to avoid immortal time bias
- For treatment comparison, suggest propensity score matching over simple regression
- Show a follow-up form only if needed (e.g., matching method preference)

**Protocol → approval → execute:**
- Save protocol to `output_dir / "PROTOCOL.md"`, show with `wait=True`
- Use `section()` to mark phases: Cohort Definition → Matching → Analysis → Conclusions
- Save scripts, data, and figures to `output_dir`; show key results as cards
- Block for approval at decision points
- Export at the end: `export("output/report.html", study=STUDY)`

---

## Red Flags

Stop and reconsider if you see:
- **"Patients who survived to receive..."** → Immortal time bias
- **"Using ICD codes to identify patients at admission"** → Information leakage
- **"Complete cases only (N drops from X to Y)"** → Selection bias
- **"Treatment group had higher mortality"** → Confounding by indication
- **"47 significant associations"** → Multiple comparisons
- **"Small sample size but p < 0.05"** → Likely false positive

---

## After Completion

1. Save `RESULTS.md` to `output_dir` with findings, effect sizes, and confidence intervals
2. Show a summary card with key findings
3. Acknowledge limitations explicitly — show as a card for the record
4. Suggest validation on independent data (e.g., eICU if used MIMIC)
5. Export: `export("output/study-report.html", study=STUDY)`

Commit message:

Fix Plotly cards not rendering in vitrine browser
The plotly.js file had an escaped backslash (\!) on line 135 that is
invalid JavaScript syntax. This caused the entire file to fail parsing,
leaving renderPlotly undefined. Any plotly card silently failed to render
— the ReferenceError was swallowed by the WebSocket message handler.

Also update research session skill to stop saving redundant .html files
for charts (vitrine cards already store the interactive Plotly spec).

src/m4/skills/system/clinical-research-session/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: clinical-research-session
description: Start a structured clinical research session. Use when users describe research goals, want to analyze cohorts, investigate hypotheses, or need a rigorous research plan. Interviews the user, then produces a research protocol.
tier: validated
category: system
---

# M4 Clinical Research Workflow

Structured clinical research from hypothesis through analysis. All work is tracked in a **vitrine study** — see CLAUDE.md for the vitrine quick reference or `/vitrine-api` for the full API.

## When This Skill Activates

- User invokes `/research` command
- User describes research intent: "I want to study...", "Can we analyze...", "What's the mortality rate for..."
- User mentions cohort analysis, hypothesis testing, or comparative studies

## Terminal and Vitrine

The researcher has the terminal and vitrine open side by side. Vitrine is where structured interaction happens — forms, data review, approvals. The terminal is where you discuss, explain reasoning, and refine.

**When blocking for input (`wait=True`), always narrate the handoff in the terminal** before the `show()` call. Tell the researcher what you've posted and what you need: "I've posted the study parameters form in vitrine — please fill in your outcome and exclusion criteria."

## Study Setup

Every research session is organized as a **study** — one study per research question, spanning one or more conversations.

```python
from m4.vitrine import (
    show, section, register_output_dir, study_context,
    list_studies, export, set_status, Form, Question,
)

STUDY = "early-vasopressors-sepsis-v1"
output_dir = register_output_dir(study=STUDY)

# FIRST card: study description as the opening vitrine card
show("""# Early Vasopressor Use in Sepsis
...research question, design, key definitions...
""", title="Study Description", study=STUDY)
```

**Continuing a study:** Call `list_studies()` and `study_context(study)` to re-orient. Use `section()` to mark a new conversation within an ongoing study — not a new study.

**Branching:** Create a new version (`v2`) when the researcher wants a different approach.

**File artifacts are mandatory.** Every DataFrame, figure, and analysis script MUST be saved to `output_dir`. Never save to `/tmp/` or rely on vitrine cards alone — cards document the narrative, files ARE the science. If the session ends, files must be the complete reproducible record.

**Required output files:**
- Numbered scripts: `01_cohort_definition.py`, `02_analysis.py`, etc. — the code that produced results
- Data: `.parquet` files for every significant DataFrame
- Figures: `.png` for every chart shown in vitrine (do NOT save `.html` — vitrine cards already store the interactive spec)

---

## Phase 1: Research Interview

Collect study parameters through vitrine forms. The interview is **adaptive** — compose questions based on what you already know from the user's initial description.

**Guidelines:**
- **Skip questions** the user already answered in their prompt
- **Add questions** not in the library if the research question demands it (time windows, subgroup definitions, method preferences)
- **Split into multiple forms** when it makes sense — quick basics first, targeted follow-up after processing answers
- Narrate each blocking call in the terminal before posting

### Question Library

Use `from m4.vitrine import Form, Question` and compose from these. **Use `multiple=True` for any question where multiple answers make sense** (e.g., exclusion criteria, confounders). Without it, options render as single-select radio buttons.

**Research question:**
```python
Question("question", question="Research Question",
         options=[
             ("Association study", "Is variable X associated with outcome Y?"),
             ("Prediction model", "Can we predict outcome Y from variables X?"),
             ("Cohort characterization", "What are the characteristics of population P?"),
         ], allow_other=True)
```

**Study design:**
```python
Question("design", question="Study Design",
         options=[
             ("Descriptive", "Characterize a cohort — demographics, severity, outcomes"),
             ("Comparative", "Compare groups — treatment vs control, exposed vs unexposed"),
             ("Predictive", "Build or validate a prediction model"),
             ("Exploratory", "Hypothesis-generating — clustering, pattern discovery"),
         ])
```

**Primary outcome:**
```python
Question("outcome", question="Primary Outcome",
         options=[
             ("In-hospital mortality", "hospital_expire_flag in admissions"),
             ("28-day mortality", "dod relative to admission or ICU entry"),
             ("90-day mortality", "dod relative to admission or ICU entry"),
             ("ICU length of stay", "los in icustays — beware survivor bias"),
             ("Hospital length of stay", "dischtime minus admittime — beware survivor bias"),
             ("Ventilator-free days", "28 minus days on mechanical ventilation"),
             ("Vasopressor-free days", "28 minus days on vasopressors"),
             ("AKI incidence", "KDIGO stage 2+ after exposure window"),
         ])
```

**Exposure / intervention:**
```python
Question("exposure", question="Exposure / Intervention",
         options=[
             ("Treatment timing", "Early vs late initiation of a therapy"),
             ("Treatment dose / intensity", "High vs low dose, or trajectory over time"),
             ("Treatment received vs not", "Binary: any use within a defined window"),
             ("Severity score / biomarker", "Continuous or categorical exposure variable"),
             ("None (descriptive study)", "No exposure — cohort characterization only"),
         ])
```

**Population:**
```python
Question("population", question="Base Population",
         options=[
             ("Sepsis (Sepsis-3)", "SOFA >= 2 + suspected infection"),
             ("Septic shock", "Sepsis-3 + vasopressor + lactate > 2 mmol/L"),
             ("ARDS / respiratory failure", "Berlin criteria or P/F ratio-based"),
             ("Cardiac arrest", "In- or out-of-hospital cardiac arrest"),
             ("Heart failure / cardiogenic shock", "Acute decompensated HF"),
             ("Acute kidney injury", "KDIGO criteria"),
             ("General ICU", "All ICU admissions, no disease-specific filter"),
         ])
```

**Exclusion criteria:**
```python
Question("exclusions", question="Exclusion Criteria", multiple=True,
         options=[
             ("First ICU stay only", "Exclude readmissions — one observation per patient"),
             ("Age < 18", "Exclude pediatric patients"),
             ("ICU stay < 24h", "Minimum observation window — watch for immortal time bias"),
             ("Early death", "Exclude death within N hours — specify N"),
             ("DNR / comfort care on admission", "Exclude treatment limitations"),
             ("Chronic dialysis / ESRD", "Exclude pre-existing end-stage renal disease"),
             ("Missing key variables", "Exclude if critical data points are absent"),
         ])
```

**Confounders:**
```python
Question("confounders", question="Key Confounders", multiple=True,
         options=[
             ("Age, sex", "Basic demographics"),
             ("Illness severity (SOFA)", "Organ dysfunction at baseline"),
             ("Illness severity (APACHE III / SAPS-II)", "Composite severity scores"),
             ("Charlson / Elixhauser comorbidities", "Pre-existing chronic conditions"),
             ("Admission type", "Medical vs surgical vs trauma"),
             ("Baseline labs", "Lactate, creatinine, bilirubin, platelets, etc."),
             ("Mechanical ventilation status", "On/off MV at baseline"),
             ("Vasopressor use at baseline", "Already on vasopressors at time zero"),
         ])
```

**Dataset:**
```python
Question("dataset", question="Primary Dataset",
         options=[
             ("mimic-iv", "Full MIMIC-IV"),
             ("mimic-iv-demo", "100 patients, good for testing"),
             ("eicu", "Multi-center ICU database"),
         ], allow_other=False)
```

### After the Interview

Review answers in the terminal. Pay attention to "Other" entries — help make them precise.

Key refinements to consider:
- **Research question** — Make specific and answerable: "Are sicker patients dying more?" → "Is day-1 SOFA independently associated with 30-day mortality in sepsis?"
- **Outcome** — Confirm operationalization (which table/column, survivor bias for LOS, follow-up window for X-free days)
- **Exposure** — Nail down time window, comparator, and immortal time bias risk
- **Population & Exclusions** — Check that exclusions don't introduce bias for this specific design
- **Confounders** — Check for mediators on the causal path (should NOT be adjusted for); consider propensity scores for treatment comparisons

---

## Phase 2: Research Protocol

Draft a structured protocol. Save to `output_dir / "PROTOCOL.md"` and show with `wait=True` for approval.

```markdown
## Research Protocol: [Title]

### Research Question
[Specific, answerable question]

### Study Design
[Descriptive/Comparative/Predictive/Exploratory]

### Population
**Inclusion:** [criteria]
**Exclusion:** [criteria with rationale]

### Variables
**Primary Outcome:** [definition and measurement]
**Exposure:** [definition and timing]
**Covariates:** [list with definitions]

### Analysis Plan
1. [Step with rationale]
2. ...

### Potential Biases & Limitations
- [Known limitation]

### M4 Skills to Use
- [Skill]: [Why]
```

---

## Phase 3: Scientific Integrity Guardrails

Apply throughout the analysis.

### Bias Prevention

**Immortal Time Bias**
- Define exposure at a FIXED time point (admission, 24h, 48h)
- Never use "ever received during stay" for treatments
- Use landmark analysis when appropriate

**Selection Bias**
- Report all exclusions with counts (CONSORT diagram)
- Analyze whether excluded patients differ
- Avoid conditioning on post-treatment variables

**Information Leakage**
- ICD codes are assigned at DISCHARGE — don't use for admission predictions
- Length of stay is only known at discharge
- Labs/vitals must be timestamped appropriately

**Confounding by Indication**
- Treatments are given to sicker patients
- Always adjust for severity (SOFA, APACHE, SAPS)
- Consider propensity scores for treatment comparisons

### Statistical Rigor

- Pre-specify primary outcome; apply Bonferroni/FDR for secondary analyses
- Report cohort sizes at each step; be cautious with small subgroups
- Report missingness; consider imputation vs complete case; perform sensitivity analyses

### Visualizations

Use plots liberally — a chart often reveals what a table hides.

**Distributions → plots, not key-value cards.** Categorical variables (race, gender, admission type) → horizontal bar chart. Continuous variables (age, LOS, SOFA) → histogram. Never `show(dict)` for a distribution with 5+ categories — use `show(fig)` instead. Reserve key-value cards for small summary stats (n, median, IQR).

Other plots: Kaplan-Meier curves for survival, forest plots for effect sizes, covariate balance after matching, CONSORT flow diagrams. If you're staring at numbers and deciding what they mean, make a plot instead.

### Reproducibility

- **Save every analysis script** as a numbered file in `output_dir`: `01_cohort_definition.py`, `02_baseline_characteristics.py`, etc. The script should be the complete, runnable Python code for that step — not a fragment. This is non-negotiable; without scripts the research is not reproducible.
- Use `show()` for decisions and findings; `section()` for phase transitions
- Use `set_status()` during long operations
- Export the complete study at the end

---

## Phase 4: M4 Skills Reference

### Severity Scores
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `sofa-score` | Organ dysfunction, Sepsis-3 criteria |
| `apsiii-score` | Comprehensive severity with mortality prediction |
| `sapsii-score` | Alternative to APACHE, international benchmarking |
| `oasis-score` | When labs unavailable (vitals only) |
| `sirs-criteria` | Historical sepsis definition, comparison studies |

### Cohort Definitions
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `sepsis-3-cohort` | Sepsis studies (SOFA >= 2 + suspected infection) |
| `first-icu-stay` | Avoid correlated observations |
| `suspicion-of-infection` | Infection timing (antibiotics + cultures) |

### Clinical Concepts
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `kdigo-aki-staging` | AKI as outcome or covariate |
| `vasopressor-equivalents` | Standardize vasopressor doses |
| `baseline-creatinine` | AKI baseline reference |
| `gcs-calculation` | Neurological status |

### Data & Methodology
| Skill | When to Use |
|-------|-------------|
| `m4-api` | Multi-step analysis, statistical tests |
| `clinical-research-pitfalls` | Review for common errors |
| `mimic-table-relationships` | Understanding joins |
| `mimic-eicu-mapping` | Cross-dataset queries |

---

## Example Flow

**User:** "I want to study if early vasopressor use affects mortality in sepsis"

**What you already know:** comparative design, sepsis population, vasopressor exposure, mortality-related. Skip those questions.

**Form:** Ask only what's missing — outcome definition, "early" window, exclusion criteria, dataset. Narrate in terminal: "I've posted a form in vitrine for the details I couldn't infer — outcome, time window, exclusions, and dataset."

**After response, refine in terminal:**
- Anchor the time window to suspected infection onset (suspicion-of-infection skill), not ICU admission
- Recommend excluding death within the exposure window to avoid immortal time bias
- For treatment comparison, suggest propensity score matching over simple regression
- Show a follow-up form only if needed (e.g., matching method preference)

**Protocol → approval → execute:**
- Save protocol to `output_dir / "PROTOCOL.md"`, show with `wait=True`
- Use `section()` to mark phases: Cohort Definition → Matching → Analysis → Conclusions
- Save scripts, data, and figures to `output_dir`; show key results as cards
- Block for approval at decision points
- Export at the end: `export("output/report.html", study=STUDY)`

---

## Red Flags

Stop and reconsider if you see:
- **"Patients who survived to receive..."** → Immortal time bias
- **"Using ICD codes to identify patients at admission"** → Information leakage
- **"Complete cases only (N drops from X to Y)"** → Selection bias
- **"Treatment group had higher mortality"** → Confounding by indication
- **"47 significant associations"** → Multiple comparisons
- **"Small sample size but p < 0.05"** → Likely false positive

---

## After Completion

1. Save `RESULTS.md` to `output_dir` with findings, effect sizes, and confidence intervals
2. Show a summary card with key findings
3. Acknowledge limitations explicitly — show as a card for the record
4. Suggest validation on independent data (e.g., eICU if used MIMIC)
5. Export: `export("output/study-report.html", study=STUDY)`
